The Joe Rogan experience.
You know, there were a period of, uh, periods of time in, in our history where,
um, people would steal our religious objects and our sacred items.
They still do. Um, and Lud our graves. Um,
there there's an,
a law called the native American graves protect and repatriation act that
was meant to repatriate those stolen items and those stolen ancestors
back to tribes so that we could help with our cultural revitalization
as well as put our ancestors back to rest. Um, uh,
there are still at least 200 ancestors
in boxes in museums. Jesus, that's just in the us 200,000.
In museums.
In the us, just in the us. So, um,
our ancestors and our cultural items and religious OB objects have also been
taken all around the world. Uh.
Imagine if it was French people,
it was 200,000 French people in boxes in museums, in the us.
And France is one of the, the worst. So there was just a case, uh, recently,
um, uh, French loved to auction our sacred objects for some reason.
Um, there was a, uh,
a sacred shield of the Pueblo of Acima, um,
in about 2016, that was, uh, being sold at auction in,
in France. And, uh, the, the tribe,
the Pueblo fought and even went to court in France to try to, uh,
stop that auction and get that item back because there was evidence that it had
been stolen in contemporary times. Um, and, uh,
uh, France said you don't have standing, um, in our courts.
Um, so even though Theyre considered sovereign or a pseudo sovereign nation
here in the United States, we didn't have standing in,
in the French court and couldn't protect that item this way. So, um,
we had to use other means of negotiation and arm twisting.
Um, that item has finally been repatriated, but it took,
it took about four years to, for that to.
Happen. So it's finally been brought back.
Yeah. It's but that's, that's just one case. This happens. Where is it now? Um,
it's back, it's back home at the AIMA Pueblo.
And did, did they happen it on display.
Or is it, no, this is a sacred object. These, it can't be on display, right?
The, these are items that are used for religious purposes. They're, they're,
they're protected, sacred items. Um, uh,
the association, we were fighting with the metropolitan museum of art, uh,
last year and the year before, because they were displaying, um,
items from a private collection that were sacred. Um,
one item was even a funeralry object was an item that, um,
is never supposed to be seen because it's buried with the ancestor.
Um, and it was on display, uh,
and without any kind of consultation with the tribes affected, uh,
it it's horrendous the way we still look at Indian
people and, um, and our cultures and our practices today.
Uh, we're still being called hens. There was an article, um, uh, uh,
I think just last week there was a, a,
a religious man saying that we're hens because we <affirmative>, we, um,
the Sage that I gave you because we burned Sage, um,
as one of our, uh, medicinal and, and spiritual practices.
That was the reason why they were calling you hens.
Yeah. And this was just in an article last week from a, um,
from a Christian group. Oh, well, yeah.
Well, I a Hehn too to them. We're all hens.
Yes. What's interesting. In these states like Indiana and Ohio, um,
where indigenous peoples have just been, um, uh, uh,
removed wholeheartedly is that tons of archeologists
and other, um, uh, people that like to loot, um,
they have taken so many things out of the ground. Um, there was a,
uh, case that the FBI actually got a hold of in Indiana,
uh, gentleman by the name of Don Miller who had a huge
ranch house and farm.
And it was just full of native America can artifacts,
including human remains. And there were even, um, uh, uh,
items from other countries that he had had looed and taken.
And the FBI actually investigated that. And, and, um,
because the man was like 90 years old, they didn't prosecute him,
but they were able to, um, uh, take back those items.
And through that N native American graves protection and repatriation act,
they've been consulting with tribes to repatriate those items back,
but that looting and collecting in, in areas like Indiana and Ohio and other.
Jimmyme actually has it up on the screen here. Oh yeah.
Fbions 2000 human bones among antiquty sees from man's.
So where did this gentleman get all this stuff? Um,
his collection was native American, including the bone,
Tim carpenter of the FBI told media outlets. Yeah. There,
the half it report Miller reportedly admitted he'd conducted illegal digging
expeditions, but he never faced criminal charges before his death in 2015.
Right.
So this guy was just digging stuff up and just showing a around his house mm-hmm
<affirmative> and there, there were rules against this.
Oh, absolutely. Absolutely.
And if so, if, if it's on land that say, if he own, like,
what if he owns a ranch? How does that work? Like if.
You're so it's, it's dependent and a lot of the things that, that he had,
it wasn't clear where he had got it from, he didn't even know or remember,
or keep any records of where he, he got a lot of the items. Um,
uh, so our laws are really screwy with this too.
So federal and tribal lands are protected.
So public lands parks, uh,
and tribal lands are protected lands. You can't go and dig in,
in federal or tribal lands without a permit, um, among other things.
Uh, but, uh, just in state, private, private lands, um,
it's really dependent on what the state laws are. And, and it's,
it's really inconsistent whether those, um,
whether looting is protected or not. Hmm.
And
so that's where it's interesting because there's a lot of gigantic ranches in
Texas that are privately owned that were originally native American hunting
grounds. They've there's ones that, uh,
a friend of mine is hunted on that they have these pic graphs.
You go inside these caves mm-hmm <affirmative>, and this is on private land.
Someone owns this, you go inside these caves and these ancient artwork, mm-hmm,
<affirmative> all over the walls of the cave. Um, and signs of fire, like,
you know, sit on the ceiling of the cave, where they lit camp fires.
Like this should probably be some sort of a historical site.
Right. And it's, it's usually ly not protected. And, and, um,
people get real angry when, um,
Indians try to get involved in, in, uh,
where there may be developments, um,
that ha will have an effect on, uh, burial side,
a sacred side or other, other type of site, um, uh, people really get angry,
angry. Mm. Um, and it, it, so it's really hard for tribes to,
um, work, to protect these areas, work,
to learn about what the areas are even about. There's been so much, um,
amateur archeology, um,
and this whole country was founded on amateur archeology. Let's dig up. Well,
look at what we found in this grave. You know, everyone was looking for,
for gold and other special things.
And oftentimes they just took whatever was in the grave and, and, and created,
um, the antiquties art market, uh, which still is,
is all over the world today. So, uh,
the is constantly looking at,
at auctions and trying to return items that,
that private collectors have obtained. Improperly. We just got a,
a human vertebra removed from a, a us auction, uh,
just a couple of weeks ago. Um, Jesus, they were selling it because, uh,
they said, um, it had an arrow, uh, point still in,
uh, you know, so that, that has, uh, value in, in, in some markets.
Um, and this.
They had done DNA on this to prove that it was.
No, it was, they were selling.
It as a, a native American vertebra. It was from a, a collector in, in,
in Massachusetts. Well, how, how could they prove that it wasn't just a,
a settler that was killed by an.
Arrow. Right. Um, I don't know. And that's the thing about,
that's the thing about, um, trying to work with auctions and private collectors?
Is they off then don't wanna work with us of course,
because they're trying to make money. Um, so oftentimes, um, items,
whether they're, um, religious objects or human remains, um,
they have a story or what's called a provenance associated with them that is
often made up to drive the price of the items.
So whether that it was a legitimate, a vertebra of native American,
we don't know cuz we can't get that collector to talk to.
Us. So the collector's under no obligation by law to talk to you.
No, that's why we try to send the FBI and our friend Tim carpenter would, um,
to them.
So how would they determine, I mean, wouldn't,
they have to do it DNA analysis of the bones and try to figure out where,
who the person was.
Uh, well,
the DNA analysis isn't necessarily gonna tell you where it came
from. It could tell you that it was native American. Would.
They even be able to get that out of bones?
I don't know. I know, and I'm not a scientist, but you know, there was a,
there was case, um, uh, really not that long ago, um,
called the Kennewick man case. I don't know if maybe you heard of it. Um,
but it was a, um, an ancestor was uncovered in,
in the state of Washington. Uh, and he was old, old, old, old,
and, uh, the university's involved, uh, in the army Corps who, who,
um, had a possession of it, uh,
were gonna repatriate it to appropriate tribes.
And what ended up happening is is that, you know, academia stepped up and said,
Hey, wait, this isn't native American. We think he's something else. Um,
and for years native Americans fought to get that ancestor,
the ancient one, uh, back. And finally, um,
after a court case, uh,
that deemed the item wasn't that the ancestor wasn't native American,
um, uh, DNA test was done. And it,
it was indeed native American and the ancestor was finally
repatriated. Um, uh.
Can I ask you how that works? Yeah. So listen,
there's you said there's 500 recognized tribes,
many more that are unrecognized mm-hmm <affirmative> who, who would that go.
To? Right. So, um.
Like say if you won and it's brought back and given to native Americans
to who and to where.
Right. So, so, so, um, let's look at the best case scenario. And in,
in, uh, a lot of museums have maintained records, um,
that may have human remains and associated funeralry objects and have enough
information to know where that came from, what side it was, uh,
located at, what county, what state, um, and we know, um,
from tribal histories, as well as, as federal, uh, us, uh,
documentation that, that, that area was likely affiliated with, with,
you know, this tribe or that tribe, or maybe, uh, several tribes.
And so consultation occurs under that law, um,
about those ancestral remains in funeral area objects, and it's determined, um,
where those items should go back. Um,
in the case scenario where there's not any information,
um, uh, oftentimes evidence of, of well,
who were the collectors that were giving to that institution, um,
what has been the history of the institution and where has it obtained different
collections? And through that, uh, you know, uh,
it's deduced, um, who may be affiliated with, uh, with those,
those items or the, the ancestors. So it can be a pretty long drawn out process.
Um, but what's interesting about it is, is,
is museums and other institutions fought this law for a long time. Um,
uh, they said, well, you know, all of our collections will, you know,
we won't be able to fulfill our purposes, a,
a museum or an academic institution to study these things. It's like, well,
hell you haven't studied it in a hundred years. Um, they haven't. Yeah, no,
most, most of these, uh, when,
when people work to consult with museums,
most of these items are in boxes and often, um,
poorly managed and maintained.
So they're just sitting somewhere in storage. Right, right.
So the museum owns it and they're kind of hoarding it. Yeah. Yeah. Interesting.
Yeah. So this Canwick man, can you, um, pull up some information about that?
Great story about it right now? Um.
<Affirmative> yeah. Great. Because I'm forgetting my dates.
When that happens. Yeah. I'm very curious what the dates would be now. Um,
when we're talking about native Americans, um, do you, uh,
agree with the idea? Okay. Let's see here, Kennewick man finally is free.
Oh, they did so much study on it.
Skeleton ever found in north America 90 he's a handsome fellow.
Let me see that picture <laugh> looks normal.
Imagine he just ran into that guy at seven 11. Like what's up bro. Looks like a,
he's like, Hey, a modern American, a modern human say, um,
that's the bones, various bones. Oh, wow. His rib bones. So what is,
does it give, give us a date on his, uh,
what they have car go to that picture of the teeth again? That's crazy.
So, so just let me tell you that, um,
looking at human remains for many, um, uh, tribal peoples is,
is difficult. It's like looking at, um, a naked body. I mean, it's,
it's, um, the essence of someone that, um, you know,
we shouldn't be seeing, oh.
So you shouldn't be seeing even these images that.
That should have been in the ground that should've gone and disappeared.
It had a journey, it got interrupted and, and, um, you know,
it, some tribes and cultures believe that that's harmful to interact,
um, or, or look at, um,
or just a little bit humiliating it's exposed. Right.
It, it, so, um.
So seeing them on display and mean is particularlyfensiveve.
Oh God. Yeah. And, and, and I, and at least in the United States,
you won't find that in any kind of public museum,
now you might in some kind of private institution or private collection, um.
What you do with mummies, right? You, you, but with native American people,
they've decided that that's a fence to the culture. So they've removed it.
Is that what you're saying? Well.
That's also happening, uh, you're finding another, uh,
in other countries who, uh, in Egypt, for example, and,
and in other cultures that, um, they're trying to get those,
um, back too. Imagine.
If there's a museum where you can go and look at Ronald Ray Reagan's head.
<Laugh> right. Some people would probably enjoy that for, for sure. I'd go.
<Laugh>. But, but it is one of those things where it's like, oh, okay,
I gotta get it. Mm-hmm <affirmative> right.
So if you have the bones of sitting bowl on display in some sort of a,
you know, Plexiglas case in museum and people are like, oh, wow, that's cool.
Okay. Would that be cool if that was Ronald Reagan, you know,
would that be cool? If that was someone from our, you know,
our lifetime mm-hmm <affirmative> that died with had Janice Joplin's head,
you know, in a box somewhere and you can go stare at it. Wouldn't that weird?
You out? Yes. Or how about Amy? Whouse how about someone who, who died? Yeah.
See what I'm saying? Yeah. Yeah.
Someone who died really recently<affirmative> it'd be like,
what are you doing well? And that's, maybe we need to look at it that.
Way. Yeah. Well,
and that's the thing is that we don't seem to look at native people in that way.
Right. We don't seem to, to, to go, oh, that's not okay. Oh,
it's not okay to outlaw their religion.
How would I feel if someone did that to me? Right, right. It it's,
it's a double standard, or I don't know what you call it, but it's just racism.
Yeah. In a way. Yeah. Racism's the right word.